[WIP] Local Source Upload (EP) (#11)
shipwright-io/community: ships/0005-local-source-upload.md

---
title: local-source-upload
authors:
  - @otaviof
reviewers:
  - @alicerum
  - @adambkaplan
approvers:
creation-date: 2021-06-23
last-updated: 2021-06-23
---

# Source Upload

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [docs](/docs/)

## Summary

Proposal to improve developer-experience by allowing to upload a local repository clone to the
Kubernetes cluster, and use Shipwright Build Controller to produce a container-image out of it.

As a developer, I can try Shipwright before opening a pull-request, and take advantage of the cluster

> resources to create the image. Effectively moving shipwright closer to the developer's inner-loop, in

Reviewer: should we assume everyone knows what "inner-loop" means in this context?

For example, in a broader sw sense, you have https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inner_loop

Conversely, in the openshift context, there are public articles like https://www.openshift.com/blog/openshift-4-2-expanded-tools-and-services-for-developers and https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2020/06/16/enterprise-kubernetes-development-with-odo-the-cli-tool-for-developers out there

perhaps a quick definition or reference link here.

Author: Indeed, good suggestion! I'll amend with the wikipedia link.

Reviewer: actually the wikipedia link is the wrong definition for our purposes :-)

sorry for the confusion, I was trying to illustrate the varying definitions

the other 2 redhat/openshift links get into the inner loop we are talking about here

Author: Ohh, I see. Thanks for the heads up, right on time :-)

Author: Please consider the new way I'm wording it, let me know if makes sense.

Reviewer: looks good feel free to mark this one resolved

other words we are "moving left before _shipping-right_".

## Motivation

Shipwright Build-Controller allows teams to build container-images out of Git repositories, register
and track their application builds in a Kubernetes native environment. This enhancement proposal
extends this ability for developers to upload uncommitted changes and use the same machinery during
the inner-loop as well.

As a developer you can try out changes before opening a pull-request, make sure the final
container-image will work out as expected, and effectively improve the developer experience.

The approach proposed here is complementary to existing [EP][local-source-code-ep] detailing local
source upload to a container-registry and later on self-extracting the image before the actual
container build process starts.

### Goals

- Improve developer experience, local clone can produce a container-image using Shipwright machinery
- Move Shipwright CLI closer to developer's inner-loop

> - Work as an alternative to [upload-to-container-registry][local-source-code-ep], in near future

Reviewer: did you mean to refer to https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/docs/proposals/enable-local-source-code-support.md ?

fwiw, I'm not sure if I see it captured there, but I do recall community discussions where we wanted the source upload mechanism to be pluggable.

At least for me, I believe this EP is in the spirit of that.

Author: Yes, the idea is to link with the EP you mentioned, and this paragraph could use better wording to reflect the upstream EP. I'll amend it.

## Proposal

This proposal includes changes in Shipwright components, and adds a new helper application to aid
data upload process.

### Sequence Diagram

The following sequence-diagram shows the relationship between the components and explains the order
of execution. In a nutshell, the CLI creates a `BuildRun` object, with settings to wait for data
upload, which can only start when the Build-Controller instructs Kubernetes to create this new pod.
The new pod, on the other hand, needs to be running and ready to receive external data.

With the data upload complete, the build-pod can continue to execute the build-strategy chosen,
producing a container-image at the end.

> ![source-upload sequence diagram](assets/0005-source-upload-sequence-diagram.png)

Reviewer: love the diagram :-)

a direct link for others to see it directly:  https://github.com/shipwright-io/community/blob/9589a6a3c3407375bc3c044fad1ad5ce42bc7f2d/ships/assets/0005-source-upload-sequence-diagram.png

about the container image built, and instructions on how to pull and use the image.

#### Watching the Build-Pod

As mentioned before, Shipwright builds are based on a sequence of containers being executed on a
single pod, the CLI needs to watch _(5)_ over the state changes, and react as soon as it happens. For
example, the build-pod can be deleted, fail immediately, fail during execution, and such. Moreover,
as we can observe on the sequence diagram, it also needs to wait for specific conditions before
streaming data.

During research and development, this requirement was translated into a [watch][client-go-watch]
instantiated on the build-pod, and a straightforward mechanism to create an event-loop around pod
[state changes][event-loop-example].  Each change of state will trigger the call of the informed
closures, and allows wiring [events and reactions in a practical manner][event-loop-usage].

### Upload Mechanism

#### Redirecting Standard Input

The data upload mechanism is the same employed on <code>[kubectl cp][kubectl-cp]</code>, which is
redirecting the standard-input (<code>STDIN</code>) from the client to the container, inside the

> desired pod.

Reviewer: some reiteration that this is part of the "pluggable mechanism" aspect of the story could be useful here, where we let users opt it

hence, if they are comfortable giving a developer the requisite permissions in the namespace in question to do `kubectl cp`, great.

Otherwise, if they are more comfortable with the requisite permissions need to employ the image registry techniques cited in https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/docs/proposals/enable-local-source-code-support.md, great.

Author: I'm wording this on the beginning of the section, please consider.

Reviewer: OK yep see it above.  I'm going to add a comment there, but feel free to mark this thread resolved.

data on <code>STDIN</code>.

#### Shipwright Build Controller

The Shipwright Build Controller works based on [Tekton Workspaces][tekton-workspaces], and therefore,
it already defines the /workspace/source mount point for all containers in the build-pod. Tekton also
adds it's own helper to ["git clone" the repository][controller-git-clone] in place.

With that said, we can simply stop Shipwright Build-Controller from issuing the "`git clone`", and
instead, add a [simple helper application][controller-waiter] that's able to hold the build-pod
execution while the data is transferred.

To accomplish this the Build-Controller needs to be able to detect it should replace the "`git
clone`" procedure by waiting for the upload helper instead. The changes done during research and
development are [here][controller-waiter-usage].

##### BuildRun Changes

The proposed API changes are the following:

```yml
---
apiVersion: shipwright.io/v1alpha1
kind: BuildRun
metadata: {}
spec:
  sources:
    - name: src
      type: LocalCopy
```

The Build Controller will inspect for a type `LocalCopy` on the "`sources"` slice, and therefore

> instead of adding the git clone step, it will instead wait for the user to upload.

Reviewer: a note perhaps detailing the relationship of buildrun sources with https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/f7ed1768b0dc5e863045b0e758544a08c7acc9b8/pkg/apis/build/v1alpha1/build_types.go#L78

Author: Good mention. I'm adding the relationship with previous EP, please consider.

Reviewer: ok feel free to resolve this one

Kubernetes cluster, and use Shipwright Build Controller to produce a container-image out of it.

As a developer, I can try Shipwright before opening a pull-request, and take advantage of the cluster
resources to create the image. Effectively moving shipwright closer to the developer's inner-loop, in
other words closer to the frequent activities while writing code ([1][InnerLoopA], [2][InnerLoopB]),
in other words we are "moving left before _shipping-right_".

## Motivation

Shipwright Build-Controller allows teams to build container-images out of Git repositories, register
and track their application builds in a Kubernetes native environment. This enhancement proposal
extends this ability for developers to upload uncommitted changes and use the same machinery during
the inner-loop as well.

As a developer you can try out changes before opening a pull-request, make sure the final
container-image will work out as expected, and effectively improve the developer experience.

The approach proposed here is complementary to existing [EP][LocalSourceCodeEP] detailing local
source upload to a container-registry and later on self-extracting the image before the actual

> container build process starts.

Reviewer: Ok after re-reading your updates and your EP refs, there are in fact connections to two existing EP's.  `LocalSourceCodeEP` and `RemoteArtifactsEP`.  That latter in fact ties into your API example.  I *think* the former pertains to the notion of being able to swap different "source upload adapters" (i.e. kubectl cp vs. the registry approach).

Assuming I'm close here, I feel like a statement or two giving a high level description somewhere along these lines (or different details if you feel my summaries and somewhat off), explaining the relationship of your new EP here, with these other 2, is a good way to kick things off.

Then below the more detailed refs to these 2 EPs that you already have build upon the "introduction" I'm asking for here.

Reviewer: ok @otaviof pointed me to where below when he discusses the CLI element of the flow, the user will have a choice on which upload option to use.

I'm fine with capturing the "swapability" of all this there and just citing the "complementary" element with this EP to the other EP here at the beginning.

### Goals

- Improve developer experience, local clone can produce a container-image using Shipwright machinery
- Move Shipwright CLI closer to developer's inner-loop
- Complementary to [upload-to-container-registry (EP)][LocalSourceCodeEP], uploading data directly to
the cluster instead

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: It would be helpful to include under the `Proposal` section, how the usage of this feature will look in SHP cli. Keep in mind the following:

- This provides another plugable option to achieve local source code. The different flavors of local source code should be almost transparent for the user. See for example the idea for the initial local source code option in [ep](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/docs/proposals/enable-local-source-code-support.md#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints-optional).
- We should avoid having different subcommands for it, so we might wanna signalize the flavors of local source code under the `shp build create`. 

The above should be stated in here.

Author: Indeed. I'll add on the document itself, my suggestion is based on the steps you see on the [demo-video](https://youtu.be/btgHUUMfSTo).

Author: Just added the command-line usage example in the proposal itself, taking in consideration we have two different upload mechanisms, so we need a flag to differentiate them. Please consider.

This proposal includes changes in Shipwright components, and adds a new helper application to aid
data upload process.

### Sequence Diagram

The following sequence-diagram shows the relationship between the components and explains the order
of execution. In a nutshell, the CLI creates a `BuildRun` object, with settings to wait for data
upload, which can only start when the Build-Controller instructs Kubernetes to create this new pod.
The new pod, on the other hand, needs to be running and ready to receive external data.

With the data upload complete, the build-pod can continue to execute the build-strategy chosen,
producing a container-image at the end.

![source-upload sequence diagram](assets/0005-source-upload-sequence-diagram.png)

To explain the sequence of events in more detail, please consider the following topics.

#### Prepare _(Step 1 to 3)_

The preparation consists on declaring a BuildRun object _(1)_ with configuration for the

> Build-Controller, to instead of appending the regular "`git clone`" step, to wait for the user input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Build-Controller, to instead of appending the regular "`git clone`" step at runtime, it will block ( _wait_ ) the execution of the strategy steps until the user input is available in the pod.
```

<code>[kubectl exec][KubectlExec]</code> on the pod keeps a <code>tar</code> process waiting for
data on <code>STDIN</code>.

#### Shipwright Build Controller

The Shipwright Build Controller works based on [Tekton Workspaces][TektonWorkspaces], and therefore,
it already defines the /workspace/source mount point for all containers in the build-pod. Tekton also
adds it's own helper to ["git clone" the repository][ControllerGitClone] in place.

With that said, we can simply stop Shipwright Build-Controller from issuing the "`git clone`", and
instead, add a [simple helper application][ControllerWaiter] that's able to hold the build-pod
execution while the data is transferred.

To accomplish this the Build-Controller needs to be able to detect it should replace the "`git
clone`" procedure by waiting for the upload helper instead. The changes done during research and
development are [here][ControllerWaiterUsage].

##### BuildRun Changes

The proposed API changes are the following:

```yml
---
apiVersion: shipwright.io/v1alpha1
kind: BuildRun
metadata: {}
spec:
  sources:
    - name: src
      type: LocalCopy
```

> The Build Controller will inspect for a type `LocalCopy` on the "`sources"` slice, and therefore

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Build Controller will inspect for a type `LocalCopy` on the `"sources"` slice, and therefore
```

instead of adding the git clone step, it will instead wait for the user to upload.

> The `sources` slice is part of [Remote Artifacts (EP)][RemoteArtifactsEP] and has been worked on, so

Reviewer 2: we need to put in that EP ( _remote artifacts_ ) the final state of sources before we merge this one. As this is introducing a new type `LocalCopy`. I´m adding this to the next community meeting, see https://github.com/shipwright-io/community/issues/15#issuecomment-874708101 .

The Remote Artifacts EP requires at least the following enhancements:
- proposal on the bundle type (local source code EP)
- proposal on the LocalCopy type (this EP)

Author: Sure! I understand the mix with Remote Artifacts due the initial text in this enhancement-proposal, so I'm now updating it it allow both EP implementations to go stand-alone. Here we have a API suggestion for when the Remote Artifact EP implementation comes along, and a method to not require API changes at all.

On amending the document I'm inclined to annotations instead of a full blown API change. Let me know your thoughts.

more effort may be needed to create a good API fit.

#### Waiting Mechanism

The container-image built by Shipwright is created by a series of steps running sequentially, those
steps are executed in the build-pod, running each container and inspecting for return-code and
errors.

The task at hand, waiting for the users' data transfer, will follow the same basic structure, which
means a simple application meant to wait for a specific condition, and exit gracefully afterwards.
Here we may keep checking if a given "lock" file exists, when removed the application exists. It also
must exit with an error on timeout.

Additionally, we can employ this application to make verifications on the streamed data, like for
instance checksum, ownership (UID/GID) and more. Another important duty is to have `tar` installed
and compatible with the activities performed by the CLI.

> The implementation written for research and development can be found at [otaviof/waiter][Waiter]

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that for waiting we will just prepend a new `step`, that will replace the `git` one when this feature is desired via CLI.

For the `waiter` image, we will need to place the code under https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/tree/main/cmd, similar to the `git` dir there, so that we can build an image from it, and define test cases under it´s package. This image should be compliant with how we are building images today ( _ubi based_ ), so we need to be able to define this in our [controller YAML](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/deploy/500-controller.yaml#L35-L36) with the `ko` nomenclature.

The `waiter` image should also support the definition of environment variables to modify the container spec where it is used, see our docs on [configuration](https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/docs/configuration.md) , in specific the `GIT_CONTAINER_TEMPLATE`.

All of the above needs to be mentioned here.

Author: Thanks for the heads up. I've just amended the text to reflect those points, please consider.

repository, and it is started by running "`waiter start`". When running it will keep watching the
file `/var/tmp/waiter.pid`, and when removed, it will exit gracefully. The following example shows it
running in the container-manager. In the following example the entrypoint receives the argument
"`start`", and the waiting begins.

```sh
$ docker run --name=waiter --interactive otaviof/waiter:latest start
2021/06/01 08:25:24 Saving PID '1' at '/var/tmp/waiter.pid'
2021/06/01 08:25:24 Attempts '600'...
2021/06/01 08:25:25 Attempts '599'...
2021/06/01 08:25:26 Attempts '598'...
2021/06/01 08:25:27 Done!
```

> When the data transfer is complete, the CLI will execute "`waiter done`", via the same "`kubectl

Reviewer 2: have you contemplated the idea on what types of results can be surfaced when the wait is completed. See some examples of what I mean:

- git step -> https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/pkg/reconciler/buildrun/resources/sources/git.go#L23-L42
- plain strategy step -> https://github.com/shipwright-io/build/blob/main/samples/buildstrategy/kaniko/buildstrategy_kaniko_cr.yaml#L61

Author: Interesting pointers, thank you. I've added wording to describe the  Tekton's `TaskResult` for the `Waiter`, and also termination-log to inform detailed execution results/logs back to Tekton/Kubernetes. Please consider.
